## Sociocultural History of Obesity
- After worldwar :two:, lots of food and little physical activity :running:.
- Women :girl: stopped preparing food for family :family:.
- Processed food industry capitalized :moneybag:.
- No home-cooked meals, people ate processed food high on calories. :hamburger::fries::pizza:
- Outsource food needs -> more salt, fat and sugar and more quantity of food because marketed as snack.
- Obesity emerged due to the above eating habits.
- Reduce saturated fat and fat in second half of 20th century but added sugar and :corn: corn syrup to taste good.
- Disrupt food availability and energy expenditure by physical activity.

## MacroNutrients Structure & Metabolism
- Need air, water and food, can survive:
    - 3 minutes without air.
    - 3 days without water. :droplet:
    - 3 weeks without food.
- **Macronutrients**
- Food intake works but Nutrients supplement intake doesn't.

- Dietary Carbohydrates
    - Simple Carbohydrates
        - Glucose (Monosaccharides)
        - Fructose (Monosaccharides)
        - Sucrose or table sugar (Disaccharides)
    - Complex Carbohydrates (polysaccharides)
        - Starch - body can breakdown and digest
        - Dietary Fiber - body can't digest

- **Digestion and Metabolism**
- Carbohydrates are converted in Glucose.
- ATP generated by metabolizing Glucose.
- If energy demands are low, Glucose can be stored in the form of Adipose Tissue.

- **Protein**
- Broken down in Amino Acids by Digestion.
- Used to build and repair tissues in body and other functions
- Can be broken down and used for energy (ATP)
- If in excess, converted into Adipose Tissue.

- **Fat**
- Can also be broken down and used for energy or stored as Adipose Tissue

- Energy Density
    - Fats      - 9 Cal/g
    - Alcohol   - 7 Cal/g
    - Carbs     - 4 Cal/g
    - Proteins  - 4 Cal/g
    - One of the reasons we have evolved to store excess nutrients as Adipose tissue.

Need to balance energy utilization and storage.

## Carbohydrates-rich Foods & Glycemic Index
- Better to eat food than nutrients.
- Whole grains like brown rice and rolled oats provide energy and have fiber which slows down the release of Glucose into the blood stream.
- Glycemic Index (GI) is measure of speed at which Glucose is released in blood stream after it's digested. Whole grains like brown rice will result in slower release in Glucose and more muted Insulin response.
- On the other hand, food high in refined carbohydrates like white bread or soda will lead to a more rapid release of Glucose into the blood which results in release of large amount of Insulin (hormone that lowers blood sugar).
- High GI food causes unstable blood sugar due to sharp peaks of Glucose and Insulin which results in early return of hunger and tendency to overeat.
- GI is lower for foods with fiber or pairing food with proteins or dietary fats.
- Low GI food is good to manage weight and balance blood-sugar levels.

## Animal & Plant based Proteins
- Functions of proteins:
    - building blocks for lean tissue
    - cell signaling
    - hormonal proteins
    - immune function
    - cellular structure
- 20 types of amino acids, 9 of them are essential i.e. our bodies can't make enough of them so we get them from food.
- Animal sources like fish :fish: and eggs :egg: provide all of the essential amino acids hence these foods are called complete protein sources.
- Plant based protein sources like beans, lentils, nuts and tofu are incomplete sources of proteins.
- This may seem like plants are an inferior source of proteins but plants can be complemented with other food sources to form a complete protein diet.
- Vegetarian sources of proteins:
    - **+** Fiber
    - **-** Fat
    - **-** saturated Fat
- Animal sources of proteins:
    - **-** Fiber
    - **+** Fat
    - **+** Saturated Fat
- Saturated fat may contribute to LDL cholesterol if consumed too much.
- Moderating intake of red meat is a sensible idea.
- People who eat lots of plant food have much better health and better longevity than people who eat a heavy meat diet.
- While trying a low carb, high protein diet it's important to pay attention to the kind and quantity of protein being consumed.
- Processed meat or high fat cuts of meat can be harmful to health even if it leads to weight loss in the short term as processed meet often contains nitrates used as preservative, which can damage blood vessels and contribute to hardening of the arteries. These are often very high in sodium which contributes to high blood pressure.
- Always best to eat moderate amount of high quality protein foods like fish and vegetarian sources that are combined for completeness.

## Dietary Fats & Their Effects on Human health
- Role of Fats in our bodies:
    - Energy storage
    - Insulation
    - Brain development
    - Protection of internal organs
- Dietary Fats are divided in two families:
    - Saturated Fats
        - Saturated with hydrogen bonds.
        - Lie flat, Pack densely.
        - So solids at room temperature.
        - Eg: Animal fats like :pig: lard and :cow: butter.
    - Unsaturated Fats
        - Double bonds b/w carbon atoms leads to less saturation with hydrogen.
        - Don't pack together hence most are liquid at room temperature.
        - Omega 3 Fatty acids found in :fish: fish oil, nuts :chestnut:, avacados, flax seeds and other :herb: vegetable oils.
        - Omega 3 Fatty acids are the only ones that human body can't make.
        - Both natural and man-made.
        - Some man-made or chemically manipulated are:
            - Found in some margarines
            - Kinds of oils that are often used for repeated cooling and reheating in deep frying machines (ones in many fast food restraunts).
        - The chemical bonds in these man-made fats are less stable, so they easily flip into trans orientation, rather than a cis orientation. Hence the name, trans fats.
        - Trans fats increase the amount of LDL cholesterol in the blood and they lower the HDL cholesterol (the good cholestrol). By doing this trans fats promote the formation of arterial plaques and increase the risk of heart disease.
    - Saturated fats also contribute to the increase in LDL cholesterol but not to the decrease in HDL cholesterol or to the development of arterial plaques as significantly as trans fats.
- Should eat foods that contain mostly naturally occurring unsaturated fats like those found in olive oil, nuts and avocados. Limit intake of foods like red meats that are high in saturated fats.

**A good dietary recommendation about fat intake is to choose foods with naturally occurring unsaturated fats, reduce consumption of saturated fats, and eliminate trans fats. Omega 3 is an essential fatty acid found in fish oil, nuts, flaxseed, and some other vegetable oils. In general, white meats tend to be leaner in that they contain lower levels of saturated fat compared to red meats. A recommendation to eat a plant-based fat whenever eating an animal product would not decrease consumption of saturated fats and may lead to an inappropriately high level of fat in the diet - it is not the best recommendation here.**
